# Final-Project---Cognitive-Load
Many tasks require cognitive effort from those who perform them, whether in driving, aviation control, patient surgery, and so on. Throughout the task, the performer must use relevant knowledge, be focused and make decisions in real time. Therefore, it is very important to monitor the level of cognitive load, in order not to impair the performance of the task. Cognitive load measurement is a complex task in itself, as the load cannot be discerned directly. For this purpose, means for objective physiological measurement such as ECG and EEG, which gauge measures of respiration, heart rate, electrical conductivity of the skin and more are used. There are quite a few problems with the use of these measurement techniques: the measuring equipment is expensive and inaccessible to the majority of the population, the use itself is cumbersome and inconvenient. In addition, there are specific questionnaires that aim to assess the perceived cognitive load subjectively. The combination of these objective and subjective indices produces as accurate a picture as possible of the level of cognitive load that the operator feels, but it can only be estimated at the end of the task, and not when it is performed.
Our research question dealt with finding the relationship between the heart rate indicators extracted from a chest strap and the level of cognitive load. Accordingly, the experiment performed as part of the project was designed to measure cognitive load at three different load levels. It was spread out over three days, so that during each day the subject performed three tasks that lasted 30 minutes each. Tasks were randomly assigned to avoid the effect of the time of day the task was performed. In each task, the subject had to wear the Polar H10 chest strap and record his heart rate using a designated app. At the same time, each subject was asked to complete two questionnaires to assess the perceived load - a SWAT questionnaire every 5 minutes while performing the task and a NASA - TLX questionnaire once at the end. Using the data extracted from the chest strap, the objective research indices were calculated, and the subjective indices were produced from the questionnaire data. Nine participants took part in the experiment, consisting of the researchers and their family members.
The study includes four hypotheses, so the data analysis is designed to address each of them. The first hypothesis is that there is a relationship between the heart rate indices measured from the chest strap and the cognitive load. The results of the experiment showed that there is a significant but not strong Spearman correlation between the measures tested and the cognitive load. The second hypothesis is that heart rate variability increases as the level of task difficulty increases. The findings clearly showed using the ANOVA test that the heart rate variability index (HRV) is similar between tasks with different load. The third hypothesis is that the time of day does not affect the heart rate indices and indeed it was found that in most indices there is no significant correlation according to the ANOVA test. The fourth hypothesis is that a model can be produced using a machine learning algorithm that can classify the load level of the task into 3 categories. The study examined the possibility of a unified model that led to low prediction percentages and an individual model for each participant. Two machine learning models were tested, and it was found that the Random Forest model predicts the low load well, but there is a significant similarity between the high and medium load data, so we combined these data. We have created a new model that manages to predict better, which includes two categories - low load and medium-high load.
In conclusion, we see great importance and potential in the ability to classify real-time cognitive load using simple tools such as the Polar H10 chest strap. Our recommendation is to develop a different, collective model, with minimal adjustments for each user, based on significantly larger data, which will create an unambiguous classification of the cognitive load.
Keywords: cognitive load, machine learning model, heart rate variability, heart rate indices
